# `3c`: Command-line tool for conversion of C code to Checked C

The `3c` tool is a command-line interface to the 3C software for
conversion of C code to Checked C. See the [3C
readme](../../docs/checkedc/3C/README.md) (for general information
about 3C) and the [build
instructions](../../docs/checkedc/3C/INSTALL.md). This document
describes how to use `3c`. It assumes that you have added the
`build/bin` directory containing the `3c` executable to your `$PATH`.

## Workflow

`3c` supports an iterative workflow for converting a C program to
Checked C as follows:

1. Run `3c`. It reads a set of `.c` files and the header files they
transitively include (these files may be written in Checked C or, as a
special case, plain C), performs a whole-program static analysis to
infer as many additions or corrections to Checked C annotations as
possible, and writes out the updated files. `3c` accepts various
options to control the assumptions it makes and the types of changes
it makes on a given pass.

2. Review the changes made by `3c` as well as what it didn't change
and any diagnostics it produced. Manually add annotations to help
Checked C verify the safety of your existing code, edit your code to
make its safety easier to verify, and/or mark parts of the code that
you don't want to try to verify with Checked C (because you know they
are beyond what Checked C can handle or verifying them just isn't
worthwhile to you at the moment).

3. Repeat until you are satisfied.

For a complete, worked example, see [our
tutorial](https://github.com/correctcomputation/checkedc-tiny-bignum-c).

The Microsoft `checkedc-clang` wiki has lots of helpful [advice on
porting C programs to Checked
C](https://github.com/Microsoft/checkedc/wiki/Legacy-Conversion-Tips),
not specific to 3C.

## Basic usage

The task of `3c` is complicated by the fact that the build system for
a typical C codebase will call the C compiler once per `.c` file,
possibly with different options for each file (include directories,
preprocessor definitions, etc.), and then link all the object files at
the end. A Clang-based whole-program analysis like 3C needs to process
all `.c` files at once _with the correct options for each_. To achieve
this, you get your build system to produce a Clang "compilation
database" (a file named `compile_commands.json`) containing the list
of `.c` files and the options for each ([how to do this depends on the
build system](../../docs/JSONCompilationDatabase.rst)), and then 3C
reads this database.

However, in a simpler setting, you can manually run `3c` on one or
more source files, for example:

```
3c -alltypes -output-postfix=checked foo.c bar.c
```

This will write the new version of each file `f.c` to `f.checked.c` in
the same directory (or `f.h` to `f.checked.h`). If `f.checked.c` would
be identical to `f.c`, it is not created.

The `-alltypes` option causes `3c` to try to infer array types. We
want to make this the default but haven't done so yet because it
breaks some things.

## More about file handling and compiler options

As an additional safeguard, `f.checked.c` or `f.checked.h` is not
written if it is outside the _base directory_, which defaults to the
working directory but can be overridden with the `-base-dir` option.
This can help ensure that you don't unintentionally modify external
libraries (though if their header files are not [annotated for Checked
C](#annotated-headers), your ability to convert your own program to
Checked C may be limited). However, there is a bug in the way the base
directory check handles `..` path components in `-I` directories and
`#include` paths (terrible, we know!), so until we can fix the bug,
please avoid using `..` path components (e.g., use `-I` with an
absolute path instead).

You can ignore the errors about a compilation database not being
found. You can specify a single set of compiler options to use for all
files by prefixing them with `-extra-arg-before=`, for example:

```
3c -alltypes -output-postfix=checked -extra-arg-before=-Isome/include/path foo.c bar.c
```

(If you were using a compilation database, such "extra" options would
be added to any compiler options in the database.)

## Annotated headers

If a Checked C program uses an element (function, variable, type,
etc.) from an external library and the only available declaration of
the element uses unsafe C pointers, the Checked C code will have to
use unsafe pointers to interact with that element. Having a
declaration that uses Checked C annotations (even if the safety of the
implementation with respect to those annotations has not been
verified) will enable both you and 3C to write better Checked C code.

In the future, we may have some scheme analogous to
[DefinitelyTyped](https://definitelytyped.org/) to distribute Checked
C headers for existing C libraries. In the meantime, the Checked C
project maintains annotated versions of the most common "system"
header files (`stdio.h`, etc.). The annotated header files do not
include all elements, but they `#include` your system's original
header files, so your program can still use unannotated elements
(though it may have to use unsafe pointers to do so). If you followed
the [build instructions](../../docs/checkedc/3C/INSTALL.md), the
annotated header files should be present in
`llvm/projects/checkedc-wrapper/checkedc/include`. The Microsoft
`checkedc-clang` wiki has [a bit more information about these header
files](https://github.com/Microsoft/checkedc-clang/wiki/Checked-C-clang-user-manual#header-files).

Currently, the annotated header files are named with a `_checked.h`
suffix, e.g., `stdio_checked.h`, so that `stdio_checked.h` can
`#include <stdio.h>` without causing infinite recursion. We hope to
switch to `#include_next` and remove the suffix soon. In the meantime,
you have to modify your code to `#include <stdio_checked.h>` instead
of `stdio.h` and so forth. The
`clang/tools/3c/utils/update-includes.py` tool will do this for you.
It takes one argument: the name of a file containing a list of paths
of `.c` and `.h` files to be updated. In the example of the previous
section, you would run:

```
cat >list <<EOL
foo.c
bar.c
EOL
PATH/TO/clang/tools/3c/utils/update-includes.py list
```

## Useful 3C-specific options

An incomplete list of useful options specific to `3c` (ordinary
compiler options may be passed via `-extra-arg-before` as stated
[above](#more-about-file-handling-and-compiler-options)):

- `-warn-root-cause`: Show information about the _root causes_ that
  prevent `3c` from converting unsafe pointers (`T *`) to safe ones
  (`_Ptr<T>`, etc.).
