# Building 3C

This document describes our current setup and build process for 3C.
You may find helpful information about topics not addressed here in
the [general Checked C build documentation](../Setup-and-Build.md).
Some items here are potentially applicable to Checked C as a whole,
and we hope to eventually harmonize them with the Checked C
documentation as appropriate.

## Supported environments

We work primarily on Linux. Checked C supports Windows, but we do not
test 3C regularly on Windows. Some of us use Mac OS X, which Checked C
does not officially support; we have gotten 3C to mostly work with
some additional steps (see below), but there are some known problems
and [Microsoft is still considering whether to work with us to address
them](https://github.com/microsoft/checkedc/issues/424#issuecomment-720648442).

## Basics

Assuming you have already cloned the `checkedc-clang` repository, run
the following (from the root of the working tree) for a basic build:

```
(cd llvm/projects/checkedc-wrapper && git clone https://github.com/microsoft/checkedc)

mkdir build && cd build
cmake ../llvm -G Ninja -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS=clang
ninja TARGET
```

where TARGET stands for the target(s) you want to build. For the `3c`
command-line tool, the target is `3c`, but assuming you want to
actually compile the Checked C source files generated by 3C, you'll
also want to build `clang` (the Checked C compiler, which is a
modified version of Clang). Executables will end up in `build/bin`;
you'll likely want to add this directory to your `$PATH`.

## Build options

Because all of LLVM and clang are built as dependencies, this may
consume up to ~50 GB of disk space, take several hours (depending on
the speed of your computer), and require ~10 GB of RAM. Incremental
builds will usually be faster. Here are some things you can do that
may reduce the build time and/or peak memory use:

- The above instructions already assume the use of the
  [Ninja](https://ninja-build.org/) build tool; you may have to
  install it. You can alternatively use `make` (remove `-G Ninja` from
  the `cmake` command and replace `ninja` with `make`), but Ninja is
  much faster in our experience.

- Pass `-DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD=X86` (or whatever your machine's
  architecture is, e.g., `ARM`) to `cmake` to build only the parts of
  `clang` needed to compile programs for your machine.

- Pass `-DLLVM_USE_LINKER=lld`. This requires a sufficiently recent
  version of `lld` to be installed on your system.

- Pass `-DLLVM_USE_SPLIT_DWARF=ON`. We have tested the build with this
  option, but it may affect some debugging tools.

- Pass `-DLLVM_OPTIMIZED_TABLEGEN=ON`.

(The reference for improving build performance is [this LLVM
page](https://www.llvm.org/docs/GettingStarted.html#common-problems),
but we have attempted to describe the most promising options here.)

You might want to use `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo` if you are
running 3C enough between builds that the faster running time
outweighs the slower build time or you simply want to test a release
build of 3C, assuming that's what end users will eventually be
encouraged to use.

## Mac OS X

On some OS X versions, you have to add
`-DDEFAULT_SYSROOT=/Library/Developer/CommandLineTools/SDKs/MacOSX.sdk`
to the `cmake` command; add it just after the `-DLLVM_ENABLE...`
flags. You also need to make sure that the XCode developer
command-line tools are installed, per [this
thread](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core/issues/20791). Go to
https://developer.apple.com/download/more/, log in with your Apple
Developer ID, and download "Command Line Tools for Xcode 11.3.1".
Then, enable these by invoking (from the command line), `sudo
xcode-select -r`.

## CR/LF issues

There is a [known
problem](https://github.com/correctcomputation/checkedc-clang/issues/317)
where git shows source files in a clean checkout as having modified
line endings, even if you only ever use Linux. The problem seems to
occur less often with newer versions of git. We believe the root cause
is that [the root `.gitattributes` file](../../../../.gitattributes)
inaccurately states that all files have LF endings, but some have CRLF
endings in the repository; we will try to fix that when we can. In the
meantime, running the following commands in a working tree that is
experiencing the problem seems to make it go away, at least
temporarily:

```
git rm .gitattributes
git status
git checkout HEAD -- .gitattributes
```
